Analysis and Conclusion


For our first project we were inspired by sabermetrics, the empirical analysis of 
baseball, to examine different facets of offensive play in the MLB and their relationship 
to the number of runs scored in a game. We aimed to find any meaningful or interesting 
correlations between runs scored per game and various other statistics. After looking at 
the data collected by sabermetricians (sourced from baseball-reference.com) and 
finding the correlation between several variables, we decided to perform analyses on 
stolen bases, batting average, and on-base slugging percentage (OPS) from 1920 to 
2019. 

First, we looked at stolen bases; plotting the data in a scatter plot and calculating the r-
value, we revealed a negligible positive correlation between the number of bases stolen 
and runs per game (0.067). We can conclude that stealing has very little impact on the 
number of runs per game or that other factors have greater impact which rend stealing 
obsolete insofar as its ability to predict runs. Considering the practice of stealing bases 
carries with it the inherent risk of losing a runner should they be caught stealing, this 
may explain why we see a drop in stolen bases in post-Moneyball baseball. Since the 
Oakland Athletics and General Manager Billy Beane embraced a data-driven approach 
in 2002, professional teams have focused increasingly on the numbers behind the 
game. 

Using the same methodology for batting average yielded a much higher correlation, with 
an r-value of 0.879 and a tidy scatter plot. However, OPS, had the highest correlation to 
number of runs per game, with an r-value of 0.895. Both batting average and OPS could 
be used to predict with an acceptable degree of uncertainty number of runs scored as 
they have correlation coefficients approaching .9, meaning there is a definite positive 
relationship between both stats and runs per game. This result is in line with 
expectations, as we would expect these offensive metrics to align, especially OPS 
which was devised specifically to improve on batting average’s predication of run 
scoring by combining the weighted metric, slugging percentage, with on-base 
percentage. 

We also wanted to look at how runs/game, stolen bases/game, batting average, and 
OPS have changed over time. We plotted three scatter plots to visualize the data, one 
with all four categories, one with just the runs/game, and one without the runs/game. 
Separating the runs/game from the other three allowed better visualization of our 
findings, as the scale on which the data was plotted could be more precise. 

We have found that overall, there has been less than a 1 run difference between any 
decade over the last hundred years. With a high value of 4.975 runs/game in the 1930s, 
and a low value of just over 4.052 in the 1960’s, there has been considerable change in 
the amount of runs per game. Our most recent data from the 2010s shows that there 
has been a drop in the number of runs per game; in fact, this last decade yields the 
lowest runs/game since the 1950s. 

